# Bayesian analysis for C-14 age estimations of various samples

This function calibrates the C-14 age of samples to get an age (in ka).
The user can choose one of the following radiocarbon calibration curve:
Northern or Southern Hemisphere or marine atmospheric. It must be the
same curve for all samples.

## Usage

``` r
AgeC14_Computation(
  Data_C14Cal,
  Data_SigmaC14Cal,
  SampleNames,
  Nb_sample,
  PriorAge = rep(c(10, 50), Nb_sample),
  SavePdf = FALSE,
  OutputFileName = c("MCMCplot", "HPD_CalC-14Curve", "summary"),
  OutputFilePath = c(""),
  SaveEstimates = FALSE,
  OutputTableName = c("DATA"),
  OutputTablePath = c(""),
  StratiConstraints = c(),
  sepSC = c(","),
  Model = c("full"),
  CalibrationCurve = c("IntCal20"),
  Iter = 50000,
  t = 5,
  n.chains = 3,
  quiet = FALSE,
  roundingOfValue = 3
)
```

## Arguments

- Data_C14Cal:

  [numeric](https://rdrr.io/r/base/numeric.html) (**required**):
  corresponding to C-14 age estimate.

- Data_SigmaC14Cal:

  [numeric](https://rdrr.io/r/base/numeric.html) (**required**):
  corresponding to the error of C-14 age estimates.

- SampleNames:

  [character](https://rdrr.io/r/base/character.html) (**required**):
  names of sample. The length of this vector is equal to `Nb_sample`.

- Nb_sample:

  [integer](https://rdrr.io/r/base/integer.html): number of samples.

- PriorAge:

  [numeric](https://rdrr.io/r/base/numeric.html) (with default): lower
  and upper bounds for age parameter of each sample in years (not in
  ka). Note that, `length(PriorAge) == 2 * Nb_sample` and
  `PriorAge[2i-1,2i]` corresponds to the lower and upper bounds of
  sample whose number ID is equal to `i`.

- SavePdf:

  [logical](https://rdrr.io/r/base/logical.html) (with default): if TRUE
  save graphs in pdf file named `OutputFileName` in folder
  `OutputFilePath`.

- OutputFileName:

  [character](https://rdrr.io/r/base/character.html) (with default):
  name of the pdf file that will be generated by the function if
  `SavePd=TRUE`, `length(OutputFileName) = =3`, see **PLOT OUTPUT** in
  **Value** section for more informations.

- OutputFilePath:

  [character](https://rdrr.io/r/base/character.html) (with default):
  path to the pdf file that will be generated by the function if
  `SavePdf=TRUE`. If it is not equal to "", it must be terminated by
  "/".

- SaveEstimates:

  [logical](https://rdrr.io/r/base/logical.html) (with default): if TRUE
  save Bayes' estimates, credible interval at level 68% and 95% and the
  result of the Gelman and Rubin test of convergence, in a csv table
  named `OutputFileName` in folder `OutputFilePath`.

- OutputTableName:

  [logical](https://rdrr.io/r/base/logical.html) (with default): name of
  the table that will be generated by the function if
  `SaveEstimates=TRUE`.

- OutputTablePath:

  character (with default): path to the table that will be generated by
  the function if `SaveEstimates=TRUE`. If it is not equal to "", it
  must be terminated by "/".

- StratiConstraints:

  [numeric](https://rdrr.io/r/base/numeric.html) matrix or
  character(with default): input object for the stratigraphic relation
  between samples. If there is stratigraphic relation between samples
  see the details section for instructions regarding how to correctly
  fill `StratiConstraints`; the user can refer to a matrix (numeric
  matrix) or to a csv file (character). If there is no stratigraphic
  relation default value is suitable.

- sepSC:

  [character](https://rdrr.io/r/base/character.html) (with default): if
  `StratiConstraints` is character, indicate column separator in
  `StratiConstraints` csv file.

- Model:

  [character](https://rdrr.io/r/base/character.html) (with default): if
  **"full"**, error on estimate calibration curve is taken account. If
  **"naive"** this error is not taken account in the age estimate.

- CalibrationCurve:

  [character](https://rdrr.io/r/base/character.html) (with default):
  calibration curve chosen. Allowed inputs are

  - **"Intcal13"** or **"Intcal13"** for Northern Hemisphere atmospheric
    radiocarbon calibration curve,

  - **"Marine13"** or **"Marine13"** for Marine radiocarbon calibration
    curve,

  - **"SHCal13"** or **"SHCal20"** for Southern Hemisphere atmospheric
    radiocarbon calibration curve

  - **a csv file, with tree columns, the first column is dedicated to
    `"Cal.BP"`, the second to `"XC-14.age"`, the third to `"Error"`. The
    decimal of this file must be a dot, and the separator must be a
    comma.**

- Iter:

  [integer](https://rdrr.io/r/base/integer.html) (with default): number
  of iterations for the MCMC computation (for more information see
  [rjags::jags.model](https://rdrr.io/pkg/rjags/man/jags.model.html)).

- t:

  integer (with default): 1 every `t` iterations of the MCMC is
  considered for sampling the posterior distribution (for more
  information see
  [rjags::jags.model](https://rdrr.io/pkg/rjags/man/jags.model.html).

- n.chains:

  [integer](https://rdrr.io/r/base/integer.html) (with default): number
  of independent chains for the model (for more information see
  [rjags::jags.model](https://rdrr.io/pkg/rjags/man/jags.model.html).

- quiet:

  [logical](https://rdrr.io/r/base/logical.html) (with default):
  enables/disables
  [rjags::rjags-package](https://rdrr.io/pkg/rjags/man/rjags-package.html)
  messages

- roundingOfValue:

  [integer](https://rdrr.io/r/base/integer.html) (with default): Integer
  indicating the number of decimal places to be used, default set to 3.

## Value

**NUMERICAL OUTPUT**

1.  **A list containing the following objects:**

    - **Sampling**: that corresponds to a sample of the posterior
      distributions of the age parameters;

    - **Outlier**: stating the names of samples that are considered as
      outliers;

    - **Model**: stating which model was chosen (`"full"` or `"naive"`);

    - **CalibrationCurve**: stating which radiocarbon calibration curve
      was chosen;

    - **PriorAge**: stating the priors used for the age parameter;

    - **StratiConstraints**: stating the stratigraphic relations between
      samples considered in the model.

2.  **The Gelman and Rubin test of convergency**: print the result of
    the Gelman and Rubin test of convergence for the age estimate for
    each sample. A result close to one is expected.  
    In addition, the user must visually assess the convergence of the
    trajectories by looking at the graph generated by the function (see
    **PLOT OUTPUT** for more informations).  
    If both convergences (Gelman and Rubin test and plot checking) are
    satisfactory, the user can consider the estimates as valid.
    Otherwise, the user may try increasing the number of MCMC iterations
    (`Iter`) or being more precise if it is possible on the `PriorAge`
    parameter to reach convergence.

3.  **Credible intervals and Bayes estimates**: prints the Bayes'
    estimates, the credible intervals at 95% and 68% for the age
    parameters for each sample.

**PLOT OUTPUT**

1.  **MCMC trajectories**: A graph with the MCMC trajectories and
    posterior distributions of the age parameter is displayed.  
    On each line, the plot on the left represents the MCMC trajectories,
    and the one on the right the posterior distribution of the
    parameter.

2.  **Summary of sample age estimates**: plot credible intervals and
    Bayes' estimate of each sample age on one graph.

To give the results in a publication, we recommend to give the Bayes'
estimate of the parameters as well as the credible interval at 95% or
68%.

## Details

**How to fill `StratiConstraints`?**

If there is stratigraphic relations between samples, *C-14 age in
`Data_C14Cal` must be ordered by order of increasing ages*.

The user can fill the `StratiConstraints` matrix as follow.

1.  **Size of the matrix**: row number of `StratiConstraints` matrix is
    equal to `Nb_sample+1`, and column number is equal to `Nb_sample`.

2.  **First line of the matrix**: for all `i in {1,...,Nb_Sample}`,
    `StratiConstraints[1,i]=1` that means the lower bound of the sample
    age (given in `PriorAge[2i-1]`) for the sample whose number ID is
    equal to `i`, is taken into account.

3.  **Sample relations**: for all `j in {2,...,Nb_Sample+1}` and all
    `i in {j,...,Nb_Sample}`, `StratiConstraints[j,i]=1` if sample age
    whose number ID is equal to `j-1` is lower than sample age whose
    number ID is equal to `i`. Otherwise, `StratiConstraints[j,i]=0`.

Note that `StratiConstraints_{2:Nb_sample+1,1:Nb_sample}` is a upper
triangular matrix.

The user can also use `SCMatrix` or
[SC_Ordered](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/SC_Ordered.md)
(if all samples are ordered) functions to construct the
`StratiConstraints` matrix.

The user can also refer to a .csv file that contains the relation
between samples as defined above. The user must take care about the
separator used in the csv file using the argument `sepSC`.  

\*\* More precision on `Model` \*\*  

We propose two models "full" or "naive". If `Model = 'full'` that means
measurement error and error on calibration curve are taken account in
the Bayesian model; if `Model = "naive"` that means only error on
measurement are taken account in the mode.

More precisely, the model considered here, as the one developed by
Christen, JA (1994), assume multiplicative effect of errors to address
the problem of outliers. In addition, to not penalise variables that are
not outliers and damage theirs estimation, we introduce a structure of
mixture, that means only variable that are considered as outlier have in
addition a multiplicative error.

## Note

Please note that the initial values for all MCMC are currently all the
same for all chains since we rely on the automatic initial value
generation of JAGS. This is not optimal and will be changed in future.
However, it does not affect the quality of the age estimates if the
chains have converged.

## References

Christen, JA (1994). Summarizing a set of radiocarbon determinations: a
robust approach. Applied Statistics, 489-503.

Reimer PJ, Bard E, Bayliss A, Beck JW, Blackwell PC, Bronl Ramsey C,
Buck CE, Cheng H, Edwards RL, Friedrich M, Grootes PM, Guilderson TP,
Haflidason H, Hajdas I, Hatte C, Heaton TJ, Hoffmann DL, Hogg AG, Hughen
KA, Kaiser KF, Kromer B, Manning SW, Niu M, Reimer RW, Richards DA,
Scott EM, Southon JR, Staff RA, Turney CSM, van der Plicht J. 2013.
IntCal13 ans Marine13 radiocarbon age calibration curves 0-50000 years
cal BP. Radiocarbon 55(4)=1869-1887.

Hogg AG, Hua Q, Blackwell PG, Niu M, Buck CE, Guilderson TP, Heaton TJ,
Palmer JG, Reimer PJ, Reimer RW, Turney CSM, Zimmerman SRH. 2013.
SHCal13 Southern Hemisphere calibration, 0-50000 years cal. BP
Radiocarbon 55(4):1889-1903

## See also

[rjags::rjags-package](https://rdrr.io/pkg/rjags/man/rjags-package.html),
[plot_MCMC](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/plot_MCMC.md),
[SCMatrix](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/SCMatrix.md),
[plot_Ages](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/plot_Ages.md)

## Author

Claire Christophe, Anne Philippe, Guillaume Guérin, Sebastian Kreutzer

## Examples

``` r
## Load data
data(DATA_C14,envir = environment())
C14Cal <- DATA_C14$C14[,1]
SigmaC14Cal <- DATA_C14$C14[,2]
Names <- DATA_C14$Names
nb_sample <- length(Names)

## Age computation of samples without stratigraphic relations
Age <- AgeC14_Computation(
 Data_C14Cal = C14Cal,
 Data_SigmaC14Cal = SigmaC14Cal,
 SampleNames = Names,
 Nb_sample = nb_sample,
 PriorAge = rep(c(20,60),nb_sample),
 Iter = 500,
 quiet = TRUE,
 roundingOfValue = 3)
#> Warning: [plot_MCMC()] 'n.iter' out of range, reset to number of observations




#> 
#> 
#> >> MCMC Convergence of Age parameters <<
#> ----------------------------------------------
#> Sample name   Bayes estimate   Uppers credible interval
#> A_S-EVA-26510     0.999       1.003 
#> A_S-EVA-26506     1.006       1.031 
#> A_S-EVA-26507     1.005       1.007 
#> A_S-EVA-26508     1.021       1.059 
#> 
#> 
#> ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
#>  *** WARNING: The following information are only valid if the MCMC chains have converged  ***
#> ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
#> 
#> 
#> 
#> >> Bayes estimates of Age for each sample and credible interval <<
#> ------------------------------------------------------
#> Sample name   Bayes estimate  Credible interval: 
#> A_S-EVA-26510     41.952224532107 
#>                       lower bound     upper bound
#>               at level 95%    41.445          42.32 
#>               at level 68%    41.798          42.214 
#> ------------------------------------------------------
#> Sample name   Bayes estimate  Credible interval: 
#> A_S-EVA-26506     45.7295932286469 
#>                       lower bound     upper bound
#>               at level 95%    45.131          46.299 
#>               at level 68%    45.474          46.042 
#> ------------------------------------------------------
#> Sample name   Bayes estimate  Credible interval: 
#> A_S-EVA-26507     44.8569158578199 
#>                       lower bound     upper bound
#>               at level 95%    43.702          45.846 
#>               at level 68%    44.429          45.375 
#> ------------------------------------------------------
#> Sample name   Bayes estimate  Credible interval: 
#> A_S-EVA-26508     45.0575897782635 
#>                       lower bound     upper bound
#>               at level 95%    43.627          46.051 
#>               at level 68%    44.519          45.407 
#> 
#> ------------------------------------------------------


```
