# Bayesian analysis for the palaeodose estimation of various samples

This function computes the palaeodose (in Gy) of one or various samples
according to the model developed in Combes et al (2015), based on an
output of
[`Generate_DataFile`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile-deprecated.md)
or
[`Generate_DataFile_MG`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile_MG-deprecated.md)
or both of them using
[`combine_DataFiles`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/combine_DataFiles.md).  
Samples, for which data is avalilable in several BIN files, can be
analysed.  
Single-grain or Multi-grain OSL measurements can be analysed
simultaneouly.

## Usage

``` r
Palaeodose_Computation(
  DATA,
  SampleNames,
  Nb_sample,
  BinPerSample = rep(1, Nb_sample),
  SavePdf = FALSE,
  OutputFileName = c("MCMCplot"),
  OutputFilePath = c(""),
  SaveEstimates = FALSE,
  OutputTableName = c("DATA"),
  OutputTablePath = c(""),
  LIN_fit = TRUE,
  Origin_fit = FALSE,
  distribution = c("cauchy"),
  Iter = 50000,
  t = 5,
  n.chains = 3
)
```

## Arguments

- DATA:

  list of objects: LT, sLT, ITimes, dLab, ddot_env, regDose, J, K,
  Nb_measurement, provided by
  [`Generate_DataFile`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile-deprecated.md)
  or
  [`Generate_DataFile_MG`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile_MG-deprecated.md).
  `DATA` contains information for more than one sample.

- SampleNames:

  character vector: names of sample. The length of this vector is equal
  to `Nb_sample`.

- Nb_sample:

  integer: number of samples.

- BinPerSample:

  integer vector (with default): vector with the number of BIN files per
  sample. The length of this vector is equal to `Nb_sample`.
  `BinPerSample`\[i\] corresponds to the number of BIN files for the
  sample whose number ID is equal to `i`. For more information to fill
  this vector, we refer to details in
  [`Generate_DataFile`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile-deprecated.md)
  or
  [`Generate_DataFile_MG`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile_MG-deprecated.md).

- SavePdf:

  boolean (with default): if TRUE save graph in pdf file named
  `OutputFileName` in folder `OutputFilePath`.

- OutputFileName:

  character (with default): name of the pdf files that will be generated
  by the function.

- OutputFilePath:

  character (with default): path to the pdf files that will be generated
  by the function.

- SaveEstimates:

  boolean (with default): if TRUE save Bayes estimates and credible
  interval at level 68 in a csv table named `OutputFileName` in folder
  `OutputFilePath`.

- OutputTableName:

  character (with default): name of the table that will be generated by
  the function if `SaveEstimates`=TRUE.

- OutputTablePath:

  character (with default): path to the table that will be generated by
  the function if `SaveEstimates`=TRUE.

- LIN_fit:

  logical (with default): if TRUE (default) allows a linear component,
  on top of the (default) saturating exponential curve, for the fitting
  of dose response curves. Please see details for more informations on
  the proposed dose response curves.

- Origin_fit:

  logical (with default): if TRUE, forces the dose response curves to
  pass through the origin. Please see details for more informations on
  the proposed growth curves.

- distribution:

  character (with default): type of distribution that defines how
  individual equivalent dose values are distributed around the
  palaeodose. Allowed inputs are **"cauchy"**, **"gaussian"**,
  **"lognormal_A"** and **"lognormal_M"**.

- Iter:

  integer (with default): number of iterations for the MCMC computation
  (for more information see \[rjags::jags.model\]).

- t:

  integer (with default): 1 every `t` iterations of the MCMC is
  considered for sampling the posterior distribution (for more
  information see \[rjags::jags.model\]).

- n.chains:

  integer (with default): number of independent chains for the model
  (for more information see \[rjags::jags.model\]).

## Value

**NUMERICAL OUTPUT**  

1.  **A list containing the following objects:**

    - **Sampling** that corresponds to a sample of the posterior
      distributions of palaeodose and equivalent dose dispersion
      parameters (both in Gy).

    - **Model_GrowthCurve**, stating which dose response fitting option
      was chosen;

    - **Distribution**, stating which distribution was chosen to model
      the dispersion of individual equivalent dose values around the
      palaeodose of the sample.

2.  **The Gelman and Rubin test of convergency**: prints the result of
    the Gelman and Rubin test of convergency for palaeodose and
    equivalent dose dispersion parameters for each sample. A result
    close to one is expected.  
    In addition, the user must visually assess the convergency of the
    trajectories by looking at the pdf file generated by the function
    (see **PLOT OUTPUT** for more informations).  
    If both convergencies (Gelman and Rubin test and plot checking) are
    satisfactory, the user can consider the printed estimates as valid.
    Otherwise, the user may try increasing the number of MCMC
    interations (`Iter`) to reach convergency.

3.  **Credible intervals and Bayes estimates**: prints the Bayes
    esitmates, the credible intervals at 95 the palaeodose and
    equivalent dose dispersion parameters for each sample.

**PLOT OUTPUT**

1.  **MCMC trajectories** A graph with the MCMC trajectories and
    posterior distributions of the palaeodose and equivalent dose
    dispersion parameters is displayed, there is one page per sample.  
    The first line of the figure corresponds to the palaeodose parameter
    and the second to the equivalent dose dispersion parameter. On each
    line, the plot on the left represents the MCMC trajectories, and the
    one on the right the posterior distribution of the parameter.

2.  **Summary of palaeodose estimates**: plot credible intervals and
    Bayes estimate of each sample palaeodose on a same graph.

To give result in a publication, we recommend to give the Bayes estimate
of the parameters as well as the credible interval at 95

## Details

**\*\* Option on growth curves \*\***

As for
[`Age_Computation`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Age_Computation.md)
and
[`AgeS_Computation`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/AgeS_Computation.md),
the user can choose from 4 dose response curves:

- **Saturating exponential plus linear growth**
  (`PalaeodosesMultiBF_EXPLIN`):

  for all `x` in IR+, `f(x)=a(1-exp(-x/b))+cx+d`; select

  - `LIN_fit=TRUE`

  - `Origin_fit=FALSE`

- **Saturating exponential growth** (`PalaeodosesMultiBF_EXP`):

  for all `x` in IR+, `f(x)=a(1-exp(-x/b))+d`; select

  - `LIN_fit=FALSE`

  - `Origin_fit=FALSE`

- **Saturating exponential plus linear growth and fitting through the
  origin** (`PalaeodosesMultiBF_EXPLINZO`):

  for all `x` in IR+, `f(x)=a(1-exp(-x/b))+cx`; select

  - `LIN_fit=TRUE`

  - `Origin_fit=TRUE`

- **Saturating exponential growth and fitting through the origin**
  (`PalaeodosesMultiBF_EXPZO`):

  for all `x` in IR+, `f(x)=a(1-exp(-x/b))`; select

  - `LIN_fit=FALSE`

  - `Origin_fit=TRUE`

**\*\* Option on equivalent dose distribution around the palaeodose
\*\***

The use can choose between :

- `cauchy`: a Cauchy distribution with location parameter equal to the
  palaeodose of the sample

- `gaussian`: a Gaussian distribution with mean equal to the palaeodose
  of the sample

- `lognormal_A`: a log-normal distribution with mean or **A**verage
  equal to the palaeodose of the sample

- `lognormal_M`: a log-normal distribution with **M**edian equal to the
  palaeodose of the sample

## Note

Please note that the initial values for all MCMC are currently all the
same for all chains since we rely on the automatic initial value
generation of JAGS. This is not optimal and will be changed in future.
However, it does not affect the quality of the age estimates if the
chains have converged.

## References

Combes, B., Philippe, A., Lanos, P., Mercier, N., Tribolo, C., Guerin,
G., Guibert, P., Lahaye, C., 2015. A Bayesian central equivalent dose
model for optically stimulated luminescence dating. Quaternary
Geochronology 28, 62-70. doi:10.1016/j.quageo.2015.04.001

## See also

[`Generate_DataFile`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile-deprecated.md),
[`Generate_DataFile_MG`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Generate_DataFile_MG-deprecated.md),
[`combine_DataFiles`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/combine_DataFiles.md),
\[rjags::rjags-package\], \[plot_MCMC\],
[`Age_Computation`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/Age_Computation.md),
[`AgeS_Computation`](https://crp2a.github.io/BayLum/dev/reference/AgeS_Computation.md)

## Author

Claire Christophe, Sebastian Kreutzer, Anne Philippe, Guillaume Guérin

## Examples

``` r
## Load data
data(DATA1,envir = environment())
## Palaeodose computation of samples GDB3
P=Palaeodose_Computation(DATA=DATA1,Nb_sample=1,SampleNames=c("GDB5"),Iter=100)
#> Compiling model graph
#>    Resolving undeclared variables
#>    Allocating nodes
#> Graph information:
#>    Observed stochastic nodes: 505
#>    Unobserved stochastic nodes: 608
#>    Total graph size: 7216
#> 
#> Initializing model
#> 
#> Warning: [plot_MCMC()] 'n.iter' out of range, reset to number of observations

#> 
#> 
#> >> Results of the Gelman and Rubin criterion of convergence <<
#> ----------------------------------------------
#>  Sample name:  GDB5 
#> ---------------------
#>       Point estimate Uppers confidence interval
#> D_GDB5    9.08        30.81 
#> sD_GDB5   1.45        2.55 
#> 
#> 
#> ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
#>  *** WARNING: The following information are only valid if the MCMC chains have converged  ***
#> ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
#> 
#> 
#> 
#> >> Bayes estimates of Age, Palaeodose and its dispersion for each sample and credible interval <<
#> ----------------------------------------------
#>  Sample name:  GDB5 
#> ---------------------
#> Parameter     Bayes estimate       Credible interval 
#> D_GDB5    125.417 
#>                       lower bound     upper bound
#>               at level 95%    99          182 
#>               at level 68%    96          114 
#> 
#> Parameter     Bayes estimate       Credible interval 
#> sD_GDB5   15.669 
#>                       lower bound     upper bound
#>               at level 95%    12          20 
#>               at level 68%    15          19 
#> 
#> ----------------------------------------------
```
